the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu so last time we've
seen the curl of uh vector
field with components M and N we defined
that to be n subx minus M sub y and we
said this measures how far that Vector
field is from being
conservative if the curl is zero and if
a field is defined everywhere then it's
going to be conservative and so when I
take a line integral along a closed
curve I don't have to compute it I know
it's going to be
zero but now let say that I have a
general Vector field so the Cur will not
be zero and I still want to compute a
line integral along a closed curve well
I could compute it directly or there's
another way and that's what we are going
to see
today so you know say that I have a
closed curve C and I want to
find the work so there's two options
one is direct calculation and the other
one is green
sporum
so green
spum is another way to avoid calculating
line integrals if we don't want
to okay so what does it say it
says if say if C is a closed
curve and
closing a region
R in the plane
and I have to insist C should go
counterclockwise and if I have a vector
field
that's defined and
differentiable everywhere not only on
the curve C which is what I need to
define the line integral but also on the
region
inside
then the line
integral for the work done along C is
actually equal to a double integral of
the region inside of curl F
da okay so
that's the conclusion and if you want me
to write it in coordinates maybe I
should do
that so the line integral in terms of
the components that that's the integral
of M DX plus n
Dy and the Curve is NX minus m y
da so that's the way to
stated
so that's a really strange statement if
you think about it because the left hand
side is a line integral okay so the way
we compute it is we take this expression
MDX plus ndy and we parameterize the
curve we Express X and Y in terms of
some variable T maybe or whatever you
want to call it and then you will do a
one variable integral over T this right
hand side here it's a double integral da
so we do it the way that we learned how
to a couple of weeks ago you take your
region you slice it in the X direction
or in the y direction and you integrate
DX Dy after setting up the bounds
carefully or maybe in polar coordinates
Rd Rd Theta but see the way way in which
you compute these things is completely
different this one on the left hand side
lives only on the
curve while the right hand side
lives everywhere in this region
inside so here X and Y are related live
on the curve here X and Y are
independent there just are some bounds
between them and of course what you're
integrating is different here it's a
line integral for work here it's a
double integral
of some function of X and
Y so you know it's a very perplexing
statement at
first but it's a very powerful tool so
we're going to try to see you know how
it works concretely what it says what
are the consequences how we could
convince ourselves that yes this works
and so on that's going to be the topic
for today uh any questions about the
statement first
NOP okay oh yeah one remark
sorry so here it says counterclockwise
what if I have a curve that goes
clockwise well you could just take the
negative and integrate counterclockwise
you
know um why do I mean somehow why does
the theorem choose counterclockwise over
clockwise you know how does it know that
it's counterclockwise rather than clock
well the answer is basically in our
convention for curl see we we've said
Cur is NX minus m y and not the other
way around and that's a Convention as
well so somehow the two conventions
match with each
other that's the best answer I can give
you so you know if you met somebody from
a different planet they might have green
theorem with the opposite conventions
with curves going clockwise and the
curve def you way
around I me probably if you met an alien
then I'm not sure if you would be
discussing
first but just in case you
know
okay uh so that being
said so there's a warning here which is
that this is
only for closed cures
okay so if I give you a curve that's not
closed and I tell you well compute the
line integral then you know you have to
do it by hand you have to parameterize
the curve or if you really don't like
that line integral you could close the
path by adding some other line integral
to it and then compute using green
theorem but you can't use green theorem
directly if the curve is not
closed okay
so let's do a quick
example so let's say that I give
you C the
circle of radius
one
centered at the point 2 comma 0
so you know it's out
here let let's make Cur C
and let's say that I do it
counterclockwise so that it
will know it will match with a statement
of a
f and let's say that I want you to
compute the line integral along c
of y eus x DX
plus 12 of x^2
minus eus
X
Dy and you know that's a kind of
statistic example but maybe I will ask
you to do that so how would you do it
directly well to do it directly you
would have to parameterize this curve so
that would probably
involve you know setting x equal 2 +
cosine sin Theta yal sin Theta but you
know I'm using as parameter of the angle
around the circle it's like the unit
circle the usual one but shifted by two
in the X Direction and then I would set
DX equals minus sin Theta D Theta I
would set Dy equals cos Theta D Theta
and I would substitute and I would
integrate from0 to 2 pi and I would
probably run into a bit of trouble
because I would have these e to the
minus X which would give me you know
something that I really don't want to
integrate so instead of doing that which
looks pretty much you know
doomed um I'm going
to instead I'm going to use green
SP so using theorum the way I will do it
is I will instead compute a double
integral
okay so I
will compute for double
integral of our the region inside of
curl F
da so I should say
probably what F
was so let's call this M let's call this
n
and then I will actually just use the
form in
coordinates NX minus m y
da and what is r here well R is the
dis in
here so of course it might not be that
Pleasant because we'll also have to set
up this double integral and for that you
know we'll have to figure out a way to
slice this region nicely we could do it
DX Dy we could do it Dy DX or maybe we
will want to actually make a change of
variables to first shift this to the
origin you know change X to xus 2 and
then switch to Polar coordinates well
let's see what happens
later okay
so what is so this is
a so what is n
subx well n subx is
X Plus eus
x minus what is M sub
y e to the minus
X
okay this is
NX this is m
y the a well it seems to simplify a bit
right I will we will just get double
integral over R of X da
a which looks suddenly a lot more
pleasant and of course I made up the
example in that way you know so that it
simplifies when you use grain
theorem um but you know that gives you
an example where you can turn a really
hard line integral into an easier double
integral now how do we compute that
double
integral
oops well
so one way would be to set it up or
let's actually be a bit
smarter and observe
that this is
actually the area of the region
R
times the x coordinate of its Center of
mass right if I look at the definition
of a center of mass it's the average
value of x so it's one over the area
time the double integral of x da well
possibly with the density but here I'm
taking uniform density
one and now I think I know just by
looking at the picture what the where
the center of mass of this circle will
be right I mean it will be right in the
middle
so that is two if you want by
Symmetry and the area of this guy is
just Pi because it's a disc of radius
one so I will just get 2
pi I of course if you didn't see that
then you could also compute that double
integral directly it's a nice
exercise but see here using geometry
helps you to actually streamline the
calculation okay any
questions uh yes
the the last part okay yes let me just
repeat the last part so I said we have
to compute the double integral of x d a
over this region here which is a dis of
radius one centered at this point is 2
0 so instead of setting up the integral
you know with bounce and integrating DX
Dy or D ydx or in polar coordinates I'm
just going to say well let's remember
the definition of the center of mass
it's the average value of the function X
in the region so it's one the area of
the region times the double integral of
x da right if you look again at the
definition of
xar it's one over ARA double integral of
XDA well maybe you know if there's a
density then it's one of mass time
double integral of x density da but if
density is one then it just becomes
this so you know switching the area
moving the area to the other side I'll
get double integral of XDA is the area
of region times the x coordinate of the
center of mass the area of a region is
pi because it's a unit dis and the
center of mass is the center of the dis
so its xar is two and I get 2
pi okay now I didn't actually have to do
this in my example today but I thought
you know that would be good review it
would remind you of center of mass and
all
that
okay um any other
questions
no okay so let's
see you know now that we've seen how to
use it in practice how to avoid
calculating a line integral if we don't
want to let's try to convince ourselves
that this theorem makes
sense okay
so well let's start with an easy case
where we should be able to know the
answer to both
sides so let's look at a special
case let's look at the case where curl f
is zero
then well we'd like to conclude that f
is
conservative that's what we've said well
let's see what
happens
so GRE theorum
says that if I have a close curve then
the line integral of f is
equal
to the double integral of curl on the
region inside and if the curl is
zero then I will be integrating zero I
will get
zero okay so this is actually how you
prove that if your vector field has Cur
zero then it's conservative
okay so in particular if you have a
vector field that's defined everywhere
in the plane then you take any closed
curve well you will get that the line
integral will be zero strictly speaking
that will only work here if the curve
goes counterclockwise but otherwise you
know just look at the various Loops that
it makes and Orient each of them
counterclockwise and some things
together um so let me state that again
so
okay so a consequence of green
spum is that if f is Def
find everywhere in the
plane
and the curl of f is zero
everywhere then f is
conservative and so this actually is the
input we needed to justify our Criterion
you know the test that we saw last time
saying well to check if something is a
gradient field if it's conservative we
just have to compute the curl and check
whether that's
zero okay so how do we prove that now
carefully well you just take a closed
curve in the plane you switch the
orientation if needed so that it becomes
counterclockwise and then you look at
the region inside
and then you
know that the line
integral will be equal to the double
integral of
curl which is the double integral of
zero therefore that's
zero but see okay so now let's say that
we try to do that for the vector field
that was on your problem set that was
not defined at the
origin you know so if you've done the
problem set and found the same answers
that I did
then you will have found that this
Vector field had Cur zero everywhere but
still it wasn't conservative because if
you went around the unit circle then you
got a line integral that was 2 pi or if
you compared the two halves you got
different answers for two paths that go
from the same point to the same point so
you know it fails this property but
that's because it's not defined
everywhere so what goes wrong with this
argument well if I take the vector field
that was on the problem set
and if I do
things you know say that I look at the
unit
circle that's a closed curve so I would
like to use green theorem green theorem
would tell me the line integral along
this Loop is equal to the double
integral of curl over this region here
the unit dis and of course the curl is
zero well except at the origin at the
origin the vector field is not defined
you cannot take the derivatives and the
curl is not
defined and somehow that messes things
up you cannot apply green theorem to the
vector
field so you cannot
apply green
theorum
to the vector
field
on problem set eight problem two
when C encloses the
origin and so that's why this guy even
though it has Cur zero is not
conservative you know there's no
contradiction and somehow you have to
imagine that well the curl here is it's
really not defined but somehow it
becomes infinite so that when you do the
double integral you you actually get 2
pi instead of zero I mean that doesn't
make any sense of course but uh that's
one way to think about
it okay any
questions
yes we know work we do can we
find Cur
well so actually it's not defined see
because the curl would the curl is zero
everywhere else so if a cur was well
defined at the origin you know you would
try to then take the double integral
well no matter what value you put for a
function you know if you have a function
that's zero everywhere except at the
origin and some other value at the
origin the integral is still zero so
it's worse than that it doesn't have
it's not only that you can't comput it
it's really that it's not defined
okay anyway that's you know like a
slightly pathological example I mean
yes well we wouldn't be able to because
the curl is not defined at the origin so
you can't actually integrate
it okay so that's that's the problem I
mean if you try to integrate you know
we've said everywhere where it's defined
the curl is zero so what you would be
integrating would be zero
but that doesn't work because at the
origin it's not defined
yes ah so if you take a curve that makes
a figure eight then indeed my proof over
there is false so I kind of tricked you
you know it's not actually correct so if
the curve does a figure eight then what
you would do is you would actually cut
it into its two halves and for each of
them you would apply theem and then you
would still get that you know if the Cur
is zero then this line integral is zero
that one is also zero so the sum is
zero okay uh small details that you
don't really need to worry too much
about but indeed if you want to be
careful with details when my proof is
not quite
complete but the conclusion is still
true
okay uh let's move
on so
I want to tell you how to prove green
theor because you know it's such a
strange formula that you know where can
it come from possibly I
mean so let me remind you first of all
the statement we want to prove is that
the line integral along a closed curve
of MDX plus n
Dy is equal to the double integral of
region inside of NX minus NY
da and you know let's simplify our lives
a bit by proving easier statements so
actually the first
observation will actually prove
something easier namely that the line
integral let's
see of MD X along a closed curve is
equal to the double integral over the
region inside of minus M sub y da okay
so that's the special
case where n is zero where you have only
an X component for your vector
field now why is that good enough well
the claim is if I can prove
this I claim you will be able to do the
same thing to prove the other case where
there's only a y
component and then if you add them
together you'll get the general
case so let me explain
okay
so a similar
argument which I will not do to save
time will show so it will be just the
same thing but switching the roles of X
and Y that if I integrate along a closed
curve and Dy then I'll get the double
integral of
sorry n
subx da
and so now if I have proved these two
formulas
separately then if you sum them
together we'll
get the correct
statement well let me not write it we
get green
SP Okay so we've simplifi simplified our
task a little bit we'll just be trying
to prove the case where there's only an
X
component so let's do
it well we have another problem which is
the region that we're looking at the
curve that we're looking at might be
very
complicated you know if I give
you let's say I give
you I don't know a curve that does
something like
this well you know it will be kind of
tricky to set up a double integral of
region inside so maybe we first just
want to look at curves that are simpler
you know that will actually allow us to
set up the double integral
easily
so the second
observation so that was the first
observation the second observation is
that we can
decompose are into simpler regions
so what do I mean by
that well let's say that I
have you know a region and I'm going to
cut it into two so I will have R1 and
R2 and then of course I need to
have the curves that go around them so I
had my initial
curve C was going around everybody
and they have
curves C1 that goes around
R1 and
C2 goes around
R2 okay
so what I would like to say
is if we can
prove that the statement is true so
let's see
for C1 and also for
C2 then I claim we can prove the
statement for C how do we do that well
we just add these two equalities
together okay why do at work there's
something fishy going on because C1 and
C2 have this piece here in the middle
that's not in that's not there in C so
if you add the line integral along C1
and C2 you get you know these unwanted
pieces but the good news is actually you
go twice through that edge in the middle
see it appears once in C1 going up and
once in C2 going down so in fact when
you will do the work you know when you
will sum the work you will add these two
guys together they will cancel
okay
so the line integral along
c will
be
then it will be the sum of the line
integrals on C1 and
C2 and that will equal therefore the
double integral over R1 plus double
integral R2 which is the double integral
R of M1
white okay and the reason for this
equality here is
because we go
twice through
the inner
part what we want
see for the boundary well we got twice
sorry
along the boundary between R1 and
R2 with opposite
orientations so the extra things cancel
out okay so that means I just need to
look at
you know smaller pieces if that makes my
life easier so now what will make my
life easy
well let's say that I have you know a
curve like
that well I guess I should really draw a
pumpkin or something like that because
it would be more seasonal but
okay well I don't really know how to
draw pumpkins
so okay so I'm going to you know what I
will do is I will cut this into smaller
regions for which I have a well defined
lower and upper boundary so that I will
be able to set up a double integral Dy
DX easily so a region like this I will
actually cut it here here and here into
five smaller pieces so that each small
piece will let me set up the double
integral Dy
DX okay
so we'll cut
into what I will call vertically
simple
regions so what's a vertically simple
region that's a region that's given by
looking at x between a and b for some
values of A and B and for each value of
x y is between some function of X and
some other function of x
okay so for example this guy is
vertically simple see X runs from this
value of x to that value of x and for
each X Y goes between this value to that
value and same with each of these
okay
so now we're down to the main step that
we have to
do which is to
prove this identity
if C is sorry
if if R is vertically
simple
and C is the boundary of R going
counterclockwise
okay so let's look at how we would do
it so we said vertically simple origion
looks like X goes between a and
b and Y goes
between two values that are given by
functions of X okay so this is yal F2 of
X this is y equal fub1 of X this is a
this is B our region is this thing in
here so let's compute both sides and
when I say compute of course we will not
get numbers because we don't know what m
is we don't know what F1 and F2 are but
I claim we should be able to simplify
things a
bitops so let's start with the line
integral how do I compute the line
integral along this
curve that goes all around
here well it looks like there will be
four
pieces okay so we actually have four
things to compute
C1 C2 C3 and
C4
okay well let's start with
C1 so if we integrate on C1 MDX how do
we do that well we know that on C1 Y is
given by a function of X so we can just
get rid of Y and express everything in
terms of in terms of X okay so we know Y
is fub1 of X and X goes from A to
B so that will be the integral from A to
B
of well I have to take the function M so
you know M depends normally on X and Y
maybe I should put X and Y
here and then I will plug y equals F1 of
X DX and then I have a single variable
integral and that's what I have to
compute of course I cannot comput it
here because I don't know what this
is so it has to stay this way
okay next
one the integral along
C2 well let's think for a second on C2
xals B it's
constant so DX is zero and you know you
would integrate actually of a variable y
but well we don't have a y component see
this is the reason why we made the first
observation we got rid of the over term
because it simplifies our life
here so we just get
zero okay just looking quickly ahead
there's another one that will be zero as
well right which one yeah C4 gives me
zero what about C3 well C3 will look a
lot like C1 okay so we're going to use
the same kind of think that we did with
C1 okay
so along C3
well let's see so on C3 Y is a function
of X
again and so we're using as our variable
X but now X goes down from B to
a so it will be the integral from B to a
of M of X and F2 of X DX or if you
prefer that's negative integral from A
to B of M of X and F2 of x
DX okay so now if I sum all these pieces
together I
get that the line integral along the
closed curve is the integral from A to B
of MX fub1 of X DX minus the integral
from A to B of M of X F2 of
X DX
so that's for left hand
side next I should try to look at my
double integral and see if I can make it
equal to
that
so let's look at V
double integral R of M yda well first
I'll take the minus sign out will make
my life a little bit easier and
second so I said I will try to set this
up in the way that's the most efficient
and my choice of this kind of region
means that it's easier to set up Dy DX
right so if I set it
up Dy
DX then I know for a given value of x y
goes from fub1 of x to F2 of
X and X goes from A to
B
right is that okay with everyone yeah
okay so now if I compute the inner
integral well what do I get if I
integrate partial and partial y with
respect to Y I'll get M
back okay
so so I will get M at the point x F2 of
x minus M at the point x F1 of
X and so this becomes the integral from
A to B I guess that was a minus sign
of M of X F2 of x minus M of X fub1 of X
DX and so that's the same as up
there
okay so that's the end of a proof
because we've checked that for this
special case when we have only an X
component and a vertically simple region
things
work then we can remove the assumption
that things are vertically simple using
this second observation we can just you
know glue the various pieces together
and prove it for any
region then we do the same thing with
the Y component that's the first
observation when we add the things
together we get green sphere I mean it's
full generality
okay so let me finish with a cool
example
so there's one place in real life where
green theorem used to be extremely
useful I say used to because computers
have actually made that obsolete but
so let me show you a picture of this
device this is called a
planimeter and what it does
oh okay and what it does is it measures
areas so it used to be
that when you you know when you were an
experimental scientist you would you
know run your chemical or biological
experiment or whatever and you would
have all of these recording devices and
the data would go well not onto a floppy
disc or a hard dis or whatever because
you didn't have those at the time you
didn't have a computer in your lab they
would go onto a piece of graph paper
know so you would have your graph paper
and you would have you know some curve
on
it and very often you wanted to know
what's the total amount of product that
you have synthesized or whatever equ
question might be it might relate with
you know the area under your curve so
you'd say oh that's easy let's just
integrate well except you don't have a
function you can put that into your
calculator the next thing you could do
is well let's count the little squares
but you know if you've seen a piece of
graph paper that's kind of time
consuming so people invented these
things called PL meters where so it's
something where there's a really
heavy think base at at one corner and
there's a lot of dials and gauges and
everything and there's one arm that you
move and so what you do is you take the
moving arm and you just slide it all
around your
curve and you look at one of the dials
and suddenly what comes you know as you
go around it gives you complete garbage
but when you come back here that dial
suddenly gives you the value of the area
of this region so how does it work you
know this gadget never knows about the
region inside because you don't take it
all over here you only take it along the
Curve so what it does actually is it
computes a line integral okay so you
know it has this system of wheels and
everything that comput for you the line
integral along c of well depends on the
model but some of them compute the line
integral of x d y some of them compute
different line integrals but they
compute some line
integral okay and now if you apply green
theorem you see that when you have a
counterclockwise
curve this will be
just the area of the region
inside and so that's you know that's how
it works I mean of course now you use a
computer and it does the sums
yes uh that cost several thousand
possibly more so that's why I didn't
bring one